okay so here's a sample data analysis
question
from the ib these data analysis
questions can
be on basically any topic one of the
more difficult things about them
is that there's not much in the way of
preparation one can do in class about
the specifics of a data analysis
question
you just have to become familiar with a
variety of them
typically they're going to involve at
some point or other looking at a graph
and calculating a gradient and trying to
figure out what the physical meaning of
that gradient is
let's have a look at this one the
question is about
investigating a fireball caused by an
explosion
when a fire burns within a confined
space the fire can sometimes spread very
rapidly in the form of a circular
fireball
knowing the speed with which these
fireballs can spread is of great
importance to firefighters
in order to be able to predict this
speed a series of controlled experiments
was carried out in which a known amount
of petroleum
petrol stored in a can was ignited
the radius r of the resulting fireball
produced by the explosion of some petrol
in a can
was measured as a function of time t the
results of the experiment for five
different volumes of petroleum
are shown plotted below uncertainties in
the data are not shown
so we've got one two three four five
separate lines here
for different amounts of petroleum so
the petroleum has been
put inside of a can and then ignited and
so if you have
five times ten to the power of minus
three cubic meters
of petroleum then over the course of the
explosion which is measured up to
somewhere between 60 and 70 uh
milliseconds you're going to get a
fireball
that follows this curve in terms of its
size so it gets up to a maximum radius
of what's that 10 11 12 13
meters in radius okay and that's after
what uh 64 milliseconds
okay and so that's how we read this
graph the fireball when first ignited is
uh of well it should be of zero size but
it's not quite zero size so
um there's some sort of uh
error going on here a systematic error
of some kind we can talk about that
later
but if you have more petroleum clearly
we're getting larger fireballs each time
so far every amount of time
the more petrol you have the larger the
fireball you have okay so now that we've
interpreted the graph let's have a look
at the questions
the original hypothesis was that for a
given volume of petrol
the radius r of the fireball would be
directly proportional to the time
t after the explosion state two reasons
why the plot of data do not
support the hypothesis first thing to
say is that this is a very
typical ib question they love to talk
about
direct proportionality and so over here
i'm going to write my answers
the two things that you need to know for
direct proportionality
are that the curve
is not straight and so that doesn't
support the hypothesis that
it's direct proportionality in order for
things to be directly proportional
you need a straight line graph and the
second thing is
the lines do not
pass through oops through the
origin and so because they don't pass
through the origin they're not directly
proportional
now sometimes in ib physics
we talk about proportionality and so
things can be
inversely proportional proportional to
the square of but
ib physics really if they use that term
proportional
that's a substitute for directly
proportional and so you can interpret
any time the word proportional is used
to mean directly proportional
and that should mean a straight line and
it should be going through the origin
in this case we have neither of those
situations being obeyed so for that
reason
we say the plot of data are not
supporting that hypothesis
let's have a look at part b the
uncertainty in the radius is
give or take 0.5 meters the addition of
error bars to the data points would show
that there is in fact a
systematic error in the plot of data so
just one reason for this systematic
error
so systematic error means that all of
the data points
would be off by the same amount roughly
in the same direction
and the reason for that well there could
be any number of reasons here but
probably one of the best is that the the
original experiment was conducted with
the
petrol stored in a can and so because it
was stored in a can well that
can's got non-zero volume and so you're
starting with whatever the size of the
can
is and so that would be the reason why
you're
not getting the lines going through the
origin you're not getting
direct proportionality uh
you might not think of that during the
exam so it would be reasonable to say
words to the effect that it's it's hard
to measure the size of a
fireball so we might want to just write
that down hard to
measure the size of our fire balls
radius perhaps it's not a perfect
sphere it could be close to it but um
i still think that the the the most
common sense answer is that the
the original cam and has non
zero volume
and this appears as a non
zero radius when there
is uh
no fuel okay and so
uh at the beginning of the the
experiment
uh over here at zero time we have some
non-zero radius and that's your
systematic error
okay down to part c
since the data do not support direct
proportionality between the radius
r of the fireball and time t a relation
of the form
r equals k t to the power of n is
proposed where k
and n are constants in order to find the
value of k
end of n the logarithm of r is plotted
against the logarithm of t
the resulting graph for a particular
volume of petrol is shown below
uncertainties in the data are not shown
and so now we have a straight line and
this is called
linearizing your data and so if we have
a curve given to us then perhaps this
curve
follows some power law and if it does
then taking the log
of both quantities allows you
to have a straight line and then you can
calculate the gradient of the straight
line and so they're following the recipe
for iv physics
use this graph to deduce that the radius
r
is proportional to t to the power of 0.4
explain your reasoning okay this is a a
little bit mathematical here
so let's have a look at how we might go
through this
let's move this on to the next page down
here so i can
type a little bit so here's our graph
question being use it to deduce that the
radius
r is proportional to t to the power of
0.4 so r is equal to
k t to the power of
n now
if we take sorry i just have to get rid
of my subscripts there
the logarithm of both sides so if r is
equal to k t
to the power of n then the log
of r is
equal to the log of
that entire function k t
to the power of n all right
now a little bit of maths in fact i'll
just move that
down to here right so hopefully we're
happy with that first
little bit of working there all right so
we're going to say that that is equal to
if you know your log laws
we can say that's log of k
multiplied by that's not a decimal point
that's multiplication
log of uh t
to the power of n
all right and then that
is equal to again log laws
know that if you take the logarithm
of an exponent logs and exponents are
exchangeable
then the exponent n
comes to the front so we have n log
t so hopefully that's making sense to
people
uh let me put brackets around this to
make it a little bit
clearer so we've got now log
of t all right so i've gone from log
k multiplied by log t to the power of n
to log k multiplied by n
log t and that's just the log law okay
log of a to the power of b is b
log a remember that
all right moving on the next little bit
is if you've got log of a multiplied by
log of b then that is log of a plus log
of b
you can switch between those two so we
have now
log of k plus
n log t
and just rearranging that so i'm going
to put
n log t
first plus log
k we have the whole formula
becoming uh log
of r equals
n log k okay so uh log of r
equals n log t plus log of k and that
kinda looks like
y equals mx plus b it's of the form y
equals mx plus b in other words our
our y axis is log of
r and our x axis is log of t
so our m the coefficient in front of
log of t that's the gradient so n's the
gradient
okay so if i can calculate the gradient
of this
curve here this line rather if i can
calculate the gradient of that line
then i'm going to get the number n all
right
so if i can find what n is
then i can answer the question
showing that r is proportional to t to
the power of
0.4 in other words i'm looking for an n
at 0.4 and we're going back over here
where the original formula was r equals
k t to the power of n so i'm looking for
an
n to be 0.4 and we've just shown
that n is actually the gradient of this
straight line graph so
that's the value i'm looking for so
let's try and do that
the gradient m is equal to rise divided
by
run and do this calculation and so i'm
going to say
that on this graph here the maximum
sort of point that i'm interested in
looking at is about 1.22 i'm going to
draw a triangle
down here and across to here okay so see
where i'm
my arrow is going there and so the
highest point
i'm going to look at is 1.22
and the lowest point here is 0.91 i
reckon the intercept there on the y axis
is 0.91
so i've got y 2
minus y 1 over
now my x2 point here is
1.8 okay so i'm looking at 1.8 i'm not
quite going to the end of that line here
i'm just going to
to where it crosses the 1.8 there so i'm
going to say
1.8 take away
1.0
1.0 is is here on the x-axis so we've
got y2 minus y1
over x2 minus x1
little triangle there you can draw it in
yourself on your paper
and you will find that if you do that on
the calculator 1.22 take away
1.22 take away 0.91 divided by 1.8 take
away
1.0 you end up with on your calculator
0.3875
and by happy circumstance that's
approximately
0.4 as required so
maybe you want to say a little statement
in english here
so because the gradient
is 0.4
n equals 0.4 and so
by the original formula
given
r equals k
t to the power of 0.4
or another way of saying that would be r
is proportion proportional
2 t to the power of
0.4 and there's our 4 marks
i'm presuming all right let's move on
now to
part d where it says it is known that
the energy released in the explosion
is proportional to the initial volume of
petrol
a hypothesis made by the experimenters
is that at a given time
the radius of the fireball is
proportional to the energy e
released by the explosion in order to
test this hypothesis
the radius r of the fireball 20
milliseconds
after the explosion was plotted against
the initial volume v
of petrol causing the fire or the
resulting graph is shown below
okay so we've got a number that's been
given here this is where
you really need to read the question
carefully it's it's sometimes
hard to notice the relevant information
here but there's a number that's been
given there so
that should hopefully stand out to you
it's a time okay milliseconds
there's no time on this graph um
so well let's read on and see how we
might include that time
the uncertainties in r have been
included now
the uncertainty in the volume of petrol
is negligible describe how the data for
the above graph
are obtained from the graph in a
okay so let's go to the graphing a
and we've got a bunch of curves
so we've got a time axis here
we're looking at the 20 millisecond time
so at 20 milliseconds we've got our
different curves here
so words to the effect that the
the graph down here has been arrived up
by looking at the previous graph by
looking at the
20 millisecond intercept okay the
the the x line drawing a vertical line
up from
20 milliseconds which is what we do over
here so drawing a line up from 20
milliseconds and seeing where it
intercepts
each of those curves and where it
intersects each of those curves
we merely need to read off the relevant
radius okay so uh
let's try and put that into natural
language i would probably say
something to the effect how how do we
how do we say that so answering this
first part here
just above the question i might say
for the original
graph in a
original fna
construct a vertical line
at 20 milliseconds
up to where it intersects
each of the curves
and read off the relevant
r value to construct
this graph
this new graph okay
draw a line of best fit for the data
points okay so
it's not going to be a straight line but
your curve
needs to be smooth and it needs to go
through
all of the error bars okay so
i actually reversed engineered this
by which i mean i did it once
by using a pencil and going through it
on a piece of paper and
what i found is that i i didn't get what
i should have got now i knew that i'd
made an error
of what i think was an error because
we're going to get to the last
question where the
y-intercept here where where this curve
that you've drawn the best fit curve
intersects with the y the the r
axis here uh it makes a difference
um and so if you're drawing that curve
and you extrapolate you extrapolate down
here do you extrapolate to here do you
extrapolate to here it's hard to tell
so it's important to use a pencil
because you just
might need to erase things
on the other hand you could just not try
not to do that and
connect this dot to this dot
smoothly okay you could reasonably do
that not extrapolate but
you kind of need to extrapolate let's
see why
part three explain whether the plotted
data together with the error bar support
the hypothesis that
r is proportional to v um
it seems to me that this is a silly
question after all we've just been asked
back here
you know these
these curves here proportional um we
said no
because they don't pass through the
origin number one and
well they they aren't straight uh
precisely the same answer here so we're
repeating ourselves so
the answer to this question part three
are these or does this data
support the hypothesis that r is
proportional to v
no they don't the data doesn't support
that because
we can't draw a straight line through
all of the error bars
okay so it's not a straight line and
number two it's not going to pass
through the origin either so
there's our two marks again same
question repeat question
all right so that's part three e
analysis shows the relation between the
radius r
energy e released and time t is in fact
given by
r to the power of 5 equals e t squared
use data from the graph in d to deduce
that the energy liberated by the
combustion of
1 times 10 to the power of minus 3 cubic
meters of petrol is about
30 megajoules okay so 30 times 10 to the
power of
6. the way that the
official mark scheme
wants you to answer this to respond to
this
is to pick a point
say 10 and to
substitute relevant values okay
and then because we've got
say 10 times 10 to the power of -3 and
we've got this data point here
so we can do an estimate by getting r so
we've got
a 10 we've got a value for for r
uh then we can find e
and and then by having calculated e for
let's say we then divide by 10 so that
we can get
one okay so
here's the last part of the question
part e
where it says analysis shows that the
relation between the radius r
energy e released in time t is in fact
given by r to the power of five equals e
t use data from the graph in d to deduce
that the energy liberated by the
combustion of
1 times 10 to the minus 3 meters cubed
or petrol is about 30
megajoules and as i was saying the
suggested technique in the sample
answers
i personally don't think is a valid one
what's going on there is that they are
saying that you should choose
in d here a particular point
but the problem there is that the value
that you ultimately get for the amount
of energy that's released by a
given volume depends
entirely upon the point that you choose
and so you'll get a different value for
if you choose this point
compared to this point and for whatever
reason the
official answers from the ib say to use
a value for v
between 5 and 15. i'm not sure if that's
a misprint
if what they actually mean as a value of
r between 5 and 15 which would include
all these data points
or not but using their particular
technique
what they say is well pick
a value and they they've picked
up here they've picked this particular
value here and
that point there uh no i'm sorry they
picked the second point here
this second point here is 10.5
is the radius and 10 is the volume
and so having picked that particular
point
you work through and you you do this so
for
r equals 10.5 and v equals 10 substitute
those
into the equation here so r equals
10.5 now all
of the experiments in that graph d
are done at 20 milliseconds so that's
how we know that our
t in this equation here equals
20 times 10 to the power of minus 3 and
so we have
um 10 to the power 10.5
to the power of 5 divided by
20 times 10 to the power of minus 3 all
squared
to get a value of the energy of 320
times 10 to the power 6 which is around
about 300 megajoules
that's for a volume equal to 10 but we
want a volume equal to
one so therefore take that number there
divide by 10 to get about 30
as required now my issue here is that
they seem to have fudged the figures
because if
you then choose not to use that value
but instead decide to use this value
here
so this is the value corresponding to v
equals 15
and v equals 15. if you go across that's
actually 11.75 it's in between these two
boxes here
so that's an r of 11.75 a v
of 15 all happening at 20
milliseconds and we can substitute in
in this way now so we get 11.75 all to
the power of 5
divided by 20 times 10 to the power
minus 3 which equals 559 times 10 to the
power of 6
which is 560 megajoules at
a 415 uh for a volume of 15.
so divide that number by 15 to get 37.
megajoules
for one liter now that doesn't seem to
me to be
approximately 30 megajoules as required
by the question
i think there's a problem with the
question okay
that entire process is invalid what we
should notice is that the question
of how much energy is released
is really a question about uh
how much energy you're getting for a
single so for 1
times 10 to the power of minus 3 meters
cubed how much energy would be produced
by burning that much fuel now if you're
burning 30
uh a volume of 30 times 10 to the power
minus 3
meters cubed in an enclosed space which
is how the entire question here
started then you might not be getting
incomplete combustion
but in that same space if you're burning
one
okay and so for one that's that's the
very first line here on this
uh on this graph here okay we don't have
a data point there but we could
extrapolate
and we notice that it's a curve and so
it's going downwards
the only way you can use the technique
is that that is provided by the ib is if
you had a straight line
okay we don't have a straight line we
explicitly went through a whole process
talking about how there was no straight
line so if we were to extrapolate this
okay we'd end up drawing a line down
here somewhere and in fact i've done
that
so this is what such a graph would look
like so if you're doing a nice smooth
curve
between here and here and then if you
extrapolate that line it's roughly there
but it's hard to tell right
we don't know whether that it actually
intersects the y-axis or the r
axis here or down here we don't know
where i've done a best guess
okay and assume that it's going around
about there somewhere above the five
does it intersect the axis there now in
truth when you've got a zero volume
of fuel you should have a zero radius of
the fireball yeah that's obvious that
much is clear but
because of the way the experiment was
done we know the radius isn't equal to
zero when the volume is equal to zero
because the
container that we put it in actually has
a certain volume
all of that said my
extrapolation suggests
that when you have v equal to one okay
the in
the the corresponding r value here then
is 6.5 so let's see what happens there
so if i extrapolate the graph so that i
get an r of 6.5 then it becomes 6.5
squared
that's my r out of the power of 5 equals
e times
20 times 10 to the power minus 3 l
squared now if i
if i use that expression to figure out e
i end up with an e of around about
29 megajoules okay
29 million no sorry not yet 29 million
megajoules 29 million joules which is 29
megajoules
and that's extremely close to the 30
megajoules required
but the problem with that process is of
course we don't know where the intercept
here is
okay really it should be down here but
it's a systematic error so it's not it's
up there somewhere
uh this is all a bit of a fudge okay so
it's a bad question not only is it a bad
question
but the suggested answers are wider the
mark
the best way of answering this would be
using an extrapolation graphical method
but even that has flaws
this is what you might need to expect
sometimes sometimes you just have to do
your best with what you've been given
i would presume that in the actual
marking of this
that either of these two techniques
would have been permissible
and if you didn't get exactly near the
30 megajoules
because you used some other data point
here
to substitute values in then you
couldn't very well be penalized for that
and that's the end of that question